v.30: pass config file to meilisearch (#1991)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/configuration/instance_options.md

# Configure Meilisearch at launch

You can configure Meilisearch at launch with **command-line options**, **environment variables**, or a **configuration file**.

These startup options affect your entire Meilisearch instance, not just a single index. For settings that affect search within a single index, see [index settings](/learn/configuration/settings.md).

## Configuration file

Meilisearch accepts a configuration file in the `.toml` format as an alternative to command-line options and environment variables. Configuration files can be easily shared and versioned, and allow you to define multiple options.

> **Environment variables can overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options can overwrite environment variables.**

Reviewer: I would add some context, like "using environment variables and config file at the same time would lead to..."

You can download the configuration file using the following command:

<CodeSamples id="instance_options_config_file_download_1" />

> Once downloaded, Meilisearch will use it as the default configuration file. You will see it when you launch Meilisearch:

Reviewer: I would write Meilisearch will read the `./config.toml` file by default, I mean the file in the working directory named `config.toml`

```
888b     d888          d8b 888 d8b                                            888
8888b   d8888          Y8P 888 Y8P                                            888
88888b.d88888              888                                                888
888Y88888P888  .d88b.  888 888 888 .d8888b   .d88b.   8888b.  888d888 .d8888b 88888b.
888 Y888P 888 d8P  Y8b 888 888 888 88K      d8P  Y8b     "88b 888P"  d88P"    888 "88b
888  Y8P  888 88888888 888 888 888 "Y8888b. 88888888 .d888888 888    888      888  888
888   "   888 Y8b.     888 888 888      X88 Y8b.     888  888 888    Y88b.    888  888
888       888  "Y8888  888 888 888  88888P'  "Y8888  "Y888888 888     "Y8888P 888  888

Config file path:       "./config.toml"
```

> If no configuration file is provided, the `Config file path` is set to `none`.

Reviewer: I would put it at the end of the section, because if no `./config.toml` file are found OR if you haven't provided any file with `--config-file-path`, `none` is displayed.
This sentence only helps users for debugging but is not necessary to understand the feature.

You can override the default configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option.

### Configuration file format

You can configure all environment variables and CLI options using a dedicated key in the configuration file. These keys follow the [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) convention. For example, `--import-dump` must be named `import_dump` in the file, `import_dumps` will throw an error.

::: warning
The only exception is the `config_file_path` key. Specifying the `config_file_path` key in the configuration file will throw an [error](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#defining-a-configuration-file-with-a-syntax-error).
:::

> By default, the file is divided into sections separated by comments. Each key has a brief description followed by a link to the relevant section of the documentation. Some keys are commented out as they are not required when launching Meilisearch, for example, `import_snapshot`, or because the value provided in the file is not the default value like `max_indexing_memory`.

Reviewer: Hum, not sure this is useful to talk about the default file we provide. The users do not need to provide a file like this exactly to make it work. It's really confusing to me to explain this

Author: It might be helpful for first-time users who just downloaded the file. Maybe we could add this part:
>Some keys are commented out as they are not required when launching Meilisearch, for example, `import_snapshot`, or because the value provided in the file is not the default value like `max_indexing_memory`.

to the config file, if you think it's useful

Reviewer: The problem is we don't have the context here, we don't know we are talking about the default config file here.

### Configuration file errors

> 

Reviewer: Do we really need to define errors in the config file feature? Is it useful for the users? Looks to much like a specification, not a guide.

Reviewer: My opinion is the full section can be removed, let me know what you think @maryamsulemani97 and @guimachiavelli

Author: I added it here because I though it might be useful, but we can get rid of it

Reviewer: From my user POV I would say it's not useful for me to know all the behavior of the features in case of errors. Errors should be explicit enough to guide me, but the docs don't need to describe them. It makes the docs heavier.
But I would rather have the opinion of gui, maybe he does not agree with me.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @curquiza, I also think this section makes the article too long. All the errors seem to work pretty much like other Meilisearch errors, so there's nothing unexpected that justifies talking about them here, I think.

# Configure Meilisearch at launch

You can configure Meilisearch at launch with **command-line options**, **environment variables**, or a **configuration file**.

These startup options affect your entire Meilisearch instance, not just a single index. For settings that affect search within a single index, see [index settings](/learn/configuration/settings.md).

## Configuration file

> Meilisearch accepts a configuration file in the `.toml` format as an alternative to command-line options and environment variables. Configuration files can be easily shared and versioned, and allow you to define multiple options.

Reviewer 2: I find it a bit weird to say that configuration files are alternatives to cli/env vars, but have it as the first configuration method. I suggest we move it below environment variables.

> **If used simultaneously, environment variables can overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options can overwrite environment variables.**

Reviewer 2: I recommend dropping the "can"s so statements are simple and leave no room for interpretation: env vars overwrite config files. You might also be able to get away with dropping the first clause, but it's your call.

```suggestion
**When used simultaneously, environment variables overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options overwrite environment variables.**
```

You can download the configuration file using the following command:

<CodeSamples id="instance_options_config_file_download_1" />

This default configuration file is divided into sections separated by comments. Each key has a brief description followed by a link to the relevant section of the documentation. Some keys are commented out as they are not required when launching Meilisearch, for example, `import_snapshot`, or because the value provided in the file is not the default value like `max_indexing_memory`.

> By default, Meilisearch will use the file `./config.toml` in the working directory as the default configuration file. You will see it when you launch Meilisearch:

Reviewer 2: I think we can drop the article. Also, we don't need to use both `./` and working directory, in my opinion because the working directory is `./`.

```suggestion
By default, Meilisearch will use the `config.toml` in the working directory as the default configuration file. You will see it when you launch Meilisearch:
```

```
888b     d888          d8b 888 d8b                                            888
8888b   d8888          Y8P 888 Y8P                                            888
88888b.d88888              888                                                888
888Y88888P888  .d88b.  888 888 888 .d8888b   .d88b.   8888b.  888d888 .d8888b 88888b.
888 Y888P 888 d8P  Y8b 888 888 888 88K      d8P  Y8b     "88b 888P"  d88P"    888 "88b
888  Y8P  888 88888888 888 888 888 "Y8888b. 88888888 .d888888 888    888      888  888
888   "   888 Y8b.     888 888 888      X88 Y8b.     888  888 888    Y88b.    888  888
888       888  "Y8888  888 888 888  88888P'  "Y8888  "Y888888 888     "Y8888P 888  888

Config file path:       "./config.toml"
```

You can override the default configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option.

### Configuration file format

> You can configure all environment variables and CLI options using a dedicated key in the configuration file. These keys follow the [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) convention. For example, `--import-dump` must be named `import_dump` in the file, `import_dumps` will throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Last bit is unnecessary and doesn't connect with the snake_case convention, imo. `import_dumps` throws an error not because it's not following the convention, but because that option doesn't exist.

```suggestion
You can configure all environment variables and CLI options using a dedicated key in the configuration file. These keys follow the [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) convention. For example, `--import-dump` must be named `import_dump` in the file.
```

::: warning

> The only exception is the `config_file_path` key. Specifying the `config_file_path` key in the configuration file will throw an [error](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#defining-a-configuration-file-with-a-syntax-error).

Reviewer 2: The first sentence lacks context: the only exception to what? the snake_case bit and the warning box make create too much distance between this statement and  "You can configure all environment variables".

```suggestion
Specifying the `config_file_path` key in the configuration file will throw an [error](/learn/configuration/instance_options.md#defining-a-configuration-file-with-a-syntax-error).
```

Meilisearch accepts a configuration file in the `.toml` format as an alternative to command-line options and environment variables. Configuration files can be easily shared and versioned, and allow you to define multiple options.

**If used simultaneously, environment variables can overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options can overwrite environment variables.**

You can download the configuration file using the following command:

<CodeSamples id="instance_options_config_file_download_1" />

> This default configuration file is divided into sections separated by comments. Each key has a brief description followed by a link to the relevant section of the documentation. Some keys are commented out as they are not required when launching Meilisearch, for example, `import_snapshot`, or because the value provided in the file is not the default value like `max_indexing_memory`.

Reviewer: "Some keys are commented out as they are not required when launching Meilisearch" => No key are required when launching Meilisearch.

From my POV this is not really useful to "justify" our default config file, but only my opinion

Reviewer 2: I believe "key" here stands for "option", no? In which case, I recommend saying option to avoid misunderstandings.

In any case, I tend to agree with with @curquiza: not sure this paragraph is necessary since we're only describing the file.

To configure a Meilisearch instance using environment variables, set the environment variable prior to launching the instance. If you are unsure how to do this, read more about [setting and listing environment variables](https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-set-and-list-environment-variables-in-linux/), or [use a command-line option](#command-line-options-and-flags) instead.

:::: tabs

> ::: tab Linux/MacOS

Reviewer 2: Would it be more accurate/inclusive to say UNIX instead of Linux? What do you think, @curquiza?

Author: Note to self: Update [this](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance) if we go with UNIX

Reviewer: Yes, in this case `Unix` is better

Environment variables for command-line flags accept `n`, `no`, `f`, `false`, `off`, and `0` as `false`. An absent environment variable will also be considered as `false`. Any other value is considered `true`.

Environment variables are always identical to the corresponding command-line option, but prepended with `MEILI_` and written in all uppercase. **Some options (e.g., `--import-snapshots`) are not available as environment variables.**

## Configuration file

Meilisearch accepts a configuration file in the `.toml` format as an alternative to command-line options and environment variables. Configuration files can be easily shared and versioned, and allow you to define multiple options.

**When used simultaneously, environment variables overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options overwrite environment variables.**

You can download the configuration file using the following command:

```sh
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/main/config.toml > config.toml
```

> By default, Meilisearch will use `config.toml` in the working directory as the default configuration file. You will see it when you launch Meilisearch:

Reviewer 3: What if you launch Meilisearch w/o a configuration file, does the `Config file path` field still appear in the startup message? If so, what is its value?

```suggestion
By default, Meilisearch will look for a `config.toml` file in the working directory. If it is present, it will be used as the configuration file. You can verify this when you launch Meilisearch:
```

```
888b     d888          d8b 888 d8b                                            888
8888b   d8888          Y8P 888 Y8P                                            888
88888b.d88888              888                                                888
888Y88888P888  .d88b.  888 888 888 .d8888b   .d88b.   8888b.  888d888 .d8888b 88888b.
888 Y888P 888 d8P  Y8b 888 888 888 88K      d8P  Y8b     "88b 888P"  d88P"    888 "88b
888  Y8P  888 88888888 888 888 888 "Y8888b. 88888888 .d888888 888    888      888  888
888   "   888 Y8b.     888 888 888      X88 Y8b.     888  888 888    Y88b.    888  888
888       888  "Y8888  888 888 888  88888P'  "Y8888  "Y888888 888     "Y8888P 888  888

Config file path:       "./config.toml"
```

You can override the default location of the configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option:

:::: tabs
::: tab CLI

```sh
./meilisearch --config-file-path="./config.toml"
```

:::

> ::: tab Environment variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
::: tab Env
```

Author: We use "Environment variable" [here](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/security/master_api_keys.html#protecting-a-meilisearch-instance)

Reviewer 3: I see. Please ignore my suggestion then—it's just some needless optimization 😅

UNIX:

```sh
export MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH="./config.toml"
./meilisearch
```

Windows:

```sh
set MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH="./config.toml"
./meilisearch
```

:::
::::

> ### Configuration file format

Reviewer 3: "file format" = `jpg`, `toml`, etc.
"file formatting" = rules for arranging text
TMYK 😉 

```suggestion
### Configuration file formatting
```

> You can configure all environment variables and CLI options using a dedicated option in the configuration file. These options follow the [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) convention. For example, `--import-dump` must be named `import_dump` in the file.

Reviewer 2: What do you think about removing the "using a dedicated option" bit?

```suggestion
You can configure all environment variables and CLI options using the configuration file. These options must be written in [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case). For example, `--import-dump` must be named `import_dump` in the file.
```

Author: We're talking about the file format here 🤔  So wouldn't it be better to talk about "options"? We don't mention them anywhere else.

Reviewer 3: I agree w/ Gui's suggestion, and would go a little further.

I also think that after this paragraph we should provide an example of a full line from a config file. Of course, anyone curious enough can look at the default config file we provide and figure it out from that... but people are lazy! This should make the formatting completely clear.

````suggestion
You can configure any environment variable or CLI option using a configuration file. In configuration files, options must be written in [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case). For example, `--import-dump` would be written as `import_dump`.

```toml
import_dump = "./example.dump"
```
````

::: warning

> Specifying the `config_file_path` option in the configuration file will throw an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifying the `config_file_path` option within the configuration file will throw an error. This is the only configuration option that cannot be set within a configuration file.
```

:::

## All instance options

### Configuration file

**Environment variable**: `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH`
**CLI option**: `--config-file-path`
**Default**: `./config.toml`
**Expected value**: a filepath

Designates the location of the configuration file to load at launch.

::: warning

> Specifying this option in the configuration file will throw an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifying this option in the configuration file itself will throw an error (assuming Meilisearch is able to find your configuration file).
```

You can download a default configuration file using the following command:

```sh
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/main/config.toml > config.toml
```

By default, Meilisearch will look for a `config.toml` file in the working directory. If it is present, it will be used as the configuration file. You can verify this when you launch Meilisearch:

```
888b     d888          d8b 888 d8b                                            888
8888b   d8888          Y8P 888 Y8P                                            888
88888b.d88888              888                                                888
888Y88888P888  .d88b.  888 888 888 .d8888b   .d88b.   8888b.  888d888 .d8888b 88888b.
888 Y888P 888 d8P  Y8b 888 888 888 88K      d8P  Y8b     "88b 888P"  d88P"    888 "88b
888  Y8P  888 88888888 888 888 888 "Y8888b. 88888888 .d888888 888    888      888  888
888   "   888 Y8b.     888 888 888      X88 Y8b.     888  888 888    Y88b.    888  888
888       888  "Y8888  888 888 888  88888P'  "Y8888  "Y888888 888     "Y8888P 888  888

Config file path:       "./config.toml"
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

If the `Config file path` is anything other than `"none"`, it means that a config file was successfully located and used to start Meilisearch.

```

You can override the default location of the configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option:

:::: tabs
::: tab CLI

```sh
./meilisearch --config-file-path="./config.toml"
```

:::

::: tab Environment variable

UNIX:

```sh
export MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH="./config.toml"
./meilisearch
```

Windows:

```sh
set MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH="./config.toml"
./meilisearch
```

:::
::::

### Configuration file formatting

You can configure any environment variable or CLI option using a configuration file. In configuration files, options must be written in [snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case). For example, `--import-dump` would be written as `import_dump`.

```toml
import_dump = "./example.dump"
```

::: warning
Specifying the `config_file_path` option within the configuration file will throw an error. This is the only configuration option that cannot be set within a configuration file.
:::

## All instance options

> ### Configuration file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Configuration file path
```

**When used simultaneously, environment variables overwrite the configuration file, and command-line options overwrite environment variables.**

You can download the configuration file using the following command:

<CodeSamples id="instance_options_config_file_download_1" />

By default, Meilisearch will use `config.toml` in the working directory as the default configuration file. You will see it when you launch Meilisearch:

```
888b     d888          d8b 888 d8b                                            888
8888b   d8888          Y8P 888 Y8P                                            888
88888b.d88888              888                                                888
888Y88888P888  .d88b.  888 888 888 .d8888b   .d88b.   8888b.  888d888 .d8888b 88888b.
888 Y888P 888 d8P  Y8b 888 888 888 88K      d8P  Y8b     "88b 888P"  d88P"    888 "88b
888  Y8P  888 88888888 888 888 888 "Y8888b. 88888888 .d888888 888    888      888  888
888   "   888 Y8b.     888 888 888      X88 Y8b.     888  888 888    Y88b.    888  888
888       888  "Y8888  888 888 888  88888P'  "Y8888  "Y888888 888     "Y8888P 888  888

Config file path:       "./config.toml"
```

> You can override the default configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can override the default location of the configuration file using the `MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH` environment variable or the `--config-file-path` CLI option:
```

:::: tabs
::: tab CLI

```sh
./meilisearch --config-file-path="./config.toml"
```

:::

::: tab Environment variable

Linux/MacOS:

```sh
export MEILI_CONFIG_FILE_PATH="./config.toml"
./meilisearch
```

> Windows:

Reviewer: Just by curiosity? Why do we now explain how to set an environment variable with Windows since we don't do it [here](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/configuration/instance_options.html#environment-variables)?

Author: Good catch. I'll update it here too

## All instance options

> ### Configuration file

Reviewer: This option cannot be used in the config file. Maybe could we mention it here again?

Author: Yes, good idea!
